Initiates paper for Journal of Open Source Software (JOSS) (#66)
miykael/atlasreader: paper/paper.md

 - name: Dan Gale
   orcid: 0000-0002-9082-1659
   affiliation: 2
 - name: Peer Herholz
   orcid: 0000-0002-9840-6257
   affiliation: "3, 4"
 - name: Ross Markello
   orcid: 0000-0003-1057-1336
   affiliation: 5
 - name: Marie-Laure Notter-Bielser
   orcid: 0000-0001-5507-4304
   affiliation: 6
 - name: Kirstie Whitaker
   orcid: 0000-0001-8498-4059
   affiliation: 7
affiliations:
 - name: The Laboratory for Investigative Neurophysiology (The LINE), Department of Radiology and Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne, Switzerland; Center for Biomedical Imaging (CIBM), Lausanne, Switzerland
   index: 1
 - name: Centre for Neuroscience Studies, Queen's University, Kingston, Canada
   index: 2
 - name: Laboratory for Multimodal Neuroimaging, Philipps-University Marburg, Hesse, Germany
   index: 3
 - name: International Laboratory for Brain, Music and Sound Research, Université de Montréal & McGill University, Montréal, Canada
   index: 4
 - name: McConnell Brain Imaging Centre, Montréal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montréal, Canada
   index: 5
 - name: Centre Leenaards de la Mémoire, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland
   index: 6

>  - name: Alan Turing Institute, University of Cambridge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - name: Alan Turing Institute, London, UK; Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
```

   index: 7
date: 28 January 2019
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

A major advantage of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) over other neuroimaging
methods is its capability to noninvasively locate a region of interest (ROI) in
the human brain. For example, using functional MRI, we are able to pinpoint
where in the brain a certain cognitive process shows higher activation than
usual. But just knowing the Cartesian coordinate of such a ROI is not useful if

> we cannot connect it with a particular brain region. For this reason, MRI images

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we cannot assign it a neuroanatomical label. For this reason, MRI images
```

are usually normalized into a common template space [@fonov2011unbiased], where
well-established atlases can be used to associate a given coordinate with the
label of a brain region. Most major neuroimaging software packages provide some

> functionality to locate the main peaks of an ROI but are most often restricted

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
functionality to locate the main peaks of an ROI but this functionality is often restricted
```

> to a few atlases, often requires manual intervention, do not give the user much

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to a few atlases, frequently requires manual intervention, does not give the user much
```

flexibility in the output creation process, and never considers the full extent
of the ROI.

To tackle those shortcomings, we created AtlasReader, a Python interface for
generating coordinate tables and region labels from statistical MRI images. With
AtlasReader, users can use any of the freely and publicly available neuroimaging
atlases, without any restriction to their preferred software package, to create

> publication-ready output figures and tables, that contain relevant information

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
publication-ready output figures and tables that contain relevant information
```

about the peaks and clusters extent of each ROI. To our knowledge, providing

> atlas information about the full extent of a cluster (i.e. the extent of overlap

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
atlas information about the full extent of a cluster (i.e. the amount of overlap
```
Minor, but avoiding using "extent" twice in the same sentence.

regions does a ROI extent, is a new feature that is not available in any other,
comparable neuroimaging software package.

Executing AtlasReader on an MRI image will lead to the creation of the following
four outputs:

1. An **overview figure** showing the ROIs throughout the whole brain at once

>    (see Figure 1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   (Figure 1).
```

Reviewer: I got weirdly pedantic about the "see"s in the original version. These are not important edits from me 🤣

2. For each ROI, an **informative figure** showing the sagittal, coronal and

>    transversal plane centered on the main peak of the ROI (see Figure 2).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   transversal plane centered on the main peak of the ROI (Figure 2).
```

3. A **table** containing relevant information about the main **peaks** in each

>    ROI (see Figure 3).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ROI (Figure 3).
```

4. A **table** containing relevant information about the **cluster extent** of

>    each ROI (see Figure 4).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   each ROI (Figure 4).
```

Users have many parameters available to guide the creation of these outputs. For
example, with `cluster_extent` a user can specify the minimum number of

> contiguous voxels required for a ROI to be shown in the output, `min_dstinace`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
contiguous voxels required for a ROI to be shown in the output, `min_distance`
```

> can be used to extract peak information of more than just one peak within a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can be used to extract information from multiple peaks within a
```

given ROI, and `atlas` can be used to specify which atlases should be used for
the output creation. By default, AtlasReader uses the AAL, the Desikan-Killiany,

> and the Harvard-Oxford atlases (see Figure 5). In the current version, users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the Harvard-Oxford atlases (Figure 5). In the current version, users
```

have also access to the Aicha, the Destrieux, the Juelich, the Marsatlas, the

> Neuromorphometrics, and the Talairach atlas.

Reviewer 2: Should these atlases all have citations? Or perhaps we could clarify that the citations are included in the AtlasReader distribution.

Author: The problem is, some atlases have multiple references and MarsAtlas and Neuromorphics have none (see [here](https://github.com/miykael/atlasreader/tree/master/atlasreader/data#marsatlas)). Should we nonetheless include them?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Neuromorphometrics, and the Talairach atlas. Further details about the individual atlases,
how to acknowledge them, and their license requirements are detailed in the
[atlasreader/data](https://github.com/miykael/atlasreader/tree/master/atlasreader/data) directory.
```

I don't think there's an easy answer to this discussion so I've suggested a link. I think this is something that the reviewers will either realise is difficult and therefore we've done our best, or they'll have a request and we can do that 😸

> have also access to the Aicha, the Destrieux, the Juelich, the Marsatlas, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also have access to the Aicha, the Destrieux, the Juelich, the Marsatlas, the
```

`scikitlearn` [@scikitlearn] and `scikitimage` [@scikitimage].

For a more detailed explanation about how AtlasReader works and instructions on
how to install the software on your system, see https://github.com/miykael/atlasreader.

# Example Output

![Overview figure showing the ROIs throughout the whole brain at once.](fig_overview_figure.png){width=660}
![Eight cluster figures, each centered on the main peak of the ROI, showing the sagittal, coronal and transversal plane of the ROI.](fig_cluster_figure.png){width=660}
![Table showing relevant information for the main peaks of each ROI. This table contains the cluster association and location of each peak, its signal value at this location, the cluster extent (in mm, not in number of voxels), as well as the membership of each peak, given a particular atlas.](table_peak.png){width=100%}
![Table showing relevant information for the cluster extent of each ROI. This table contains the cluster association and location of each peak, the mean value within the cluster, the cluster extent (in mm, not in number of voxels), as well as the membership of each cluster, given a particular atlas.](table_cluster.png){width=100%}

> ![Individually colored label of the three default atlases, AAL, Desikan-Killiany and Harvard-Oxford, overlaid on the ICBM 2009c nonlinear asymmetric atlas. The Harvard-Oxford atlas is visualized differently because it is a probability atlas and therefore has overlapping regions.](fig_default_atlases.png){width=660}

Reviewer 2: You reference "Figure [1-4]" in your summary above but there are no Figure #s here for any of the images -- should they be added?

Author: I was confused about this as well, but as much as I got from other JOSS publications, this will be added from JOSS itself. We will see. During submission you can generate the paper, see how it looks like and submit changes if you like.

# Acknowledgement

Michael Philipp Notter is grateful for the support of the Swiss National Science
Foundation grants, awarded to M. Murray (320030-149982, 320030-169206,

> and 51NF40-158776).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and 51NF40-158776). Kirstie Whitaker is funded through an Alan Turing Institute 
Research Fellowship under EPSRC Research grant (TU/A/000017). This project 
was started at Neurohackademy 2018 which is funded by the National Institute 
of Mental Health through a grant to Ariel Rokem and Tal Yarkoni (INSERT CODE).
```

@arokem and @tyarkoni - if you get pinged on this, can you tell us the Neurohackademy code (and if you'd like to adjust this wording at all!)

Reviewer 3: Thanks for mentioning our funding! We really appreciate that! 

The grant number is R25MH112480

Good luck with the paper!

Author: Thank you @arokem for the grant number. I've added it with https://github.com/miykael/atlasreader/pull/66/commits/615feee962b90bac8c8a8bd568b63b0a283eca98.

And @KirstieJane is completely right to add this. Neurohackademy was a clear catalyst to this project (and so much more).

---

> title: 'AtlasReader: A Python package to generate coordinate tables, region labels and informative figures from statistical MRI images'

Author: Thanks. Coming from German I struggle the most with this. It seems already random in German, so I'm happy if you correct me with that.

   index: 7
date: 28 January 2019
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

A major advantage of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) over other neuroimaging methods is its capability to noninvasively locate a region of interest (ROI) in the human brain. For example, using functional MRI, we are able to pinpoint where in the brain a certain cognitive process shows higher activation than usual. But just knowing the cartesian coordinate of such a ROI doesn't help much, if we cannot connect it with a particular brain region. For this reason, MRI images are usually normalized into a common template space [@fonov2011unbiased], where well-established atlases can be used to associate a given coordinate with the label of a brain region. Most major neuroimaging software packages provide some functionality to locate the main peaks of an ROI but are most often restricted to a few atlases, often requires manual intervention, do not give the user much flexibility in the output creation process and never considers the full extent of the ROI.

> To tackle those shortcomings, we created AtlasReader, a Python interface for generating coordinate tables and region labels from statistical MRI images. With AtlasReader, users can use any of the freely and publicly available neuroimaging atlases, without any restriction to their preferred software package, to create publication-ready output figures and tables, that contain relevant information about the peaks and clusters extent of each ROI. To our knowledge, providing atlas information about the full extent of a cluster, i.e. over which atlas regions does a ROI extent, is a new feature that so far is not available in any other, comparable neuroimaging software package.

Author: I will include these changes in a later stage. At the moment I cannot commit these suggestions. Only resolve the conversation.

> Executing AtlasReader on an MRI image will lead to the creation of the following four kinds of outputs:

Author: Outdated suggestion. I will resolve the conversation and add it with another commit.

Users have many parameters available to guide the creation of these outputs. For example, with `cluster_extent` a user can specify the minimum number of contiguous voxels required for a ROI to be shown in the output, `min_dstinace` can be used to extract peak information of more than just one peak within a given ROI, and `atlas` can be used to specify which atlases should be used for the output creation. By default, AtlasReader uses the AAL, the Desikan-Killiany, and the Harvard-Oxford atlases (see Figure 5). In the current version, users have also access to the Aicha, the Destrieux, the Juelich, the Marsatlas, the Neuromorphometrics, and the Talairach atlas.

AtlasReader is licensed under the BSD-3 license and depends on the following python libraries: `matplotlib` [@matplotlib], `nibabel` [@nibabel], `nilearn` [@nilearn], `numpy` [@numpy], `scipy` [@scipy], `scikitlearn` [@scikitlearn] and `scikitimage` [@scikitimage].

For a more detailed explanation about how AtlasReader works and instructions on how to install the software on your system, see https://github.com/miykael/atlasreader.

# Example Output

> ![Overview figure showing the ROIs throughout the whole brain at once.](fig_overview_figure.png){width=660}

Reviewer 4: I was about to push the same thing....hehe

> ![Overview figure showing the ROIs throughout the whole brain at once.](fig_overview_figure.png){width=660}

Author: I saw this used in a JOSS paper. We will see if it works, otherwise, we can drop it.
